h1. Sinatra::Cache

Adds a very *simple* Page Caching functionality to "Sinatra":http://www.sinatrarb.com/

<hr>

h3. *PLEASE KEEP THIS IN MIND* 

This is *unfinished work*, so use with care.

If you find it lacking or badly coded, please feel free to fork and improve. I'll be very happy :)

<hr>


h3. TODO's


= Make caching an option of the normal <tt>erb()/haml()/sass()</tt> methods, sort of like this:
<pre><code>
  erb(:index, :cache => true/false)
  
  # alternatively enable caching by setting a global config like this
  set :cache_enabled_for :all || :only/except => ['/','/contact',...]
  
</code></pre>


= Improve the logging output to the standard Sinatra output (if we are having :logging enabled )

= Add fragment caching...

= Enable the options functionality for the <tt>:cache</tt> & <tt>:cache_expire</tt> methods, so that they can take custom extensions and more


<hr>


h3. CONFIGURATION

*Example 1: Sinatra 'classic' app.*

  <pre><code>
  <snip....>
  require 'sinatra/cache'
  
  # toggle for the cache functionality.
  set :cache_enabled, true
  # sets the default extension for cached files
  set :cache_page_extension, '.html'
  # sets the Cache dir to the root of the /public directory.
  set :cache_output_dir, '' # was :cache_dir
  ...
  </code></pre>

*Example 2: Sinatra 'sub-classed' app.*
    
<pre><code>
  <snip....>
  require 'sinatra/cache'
  
  class MyApp < Sinatra::Base
    
    register Sinatra::Cache
    
    # toggle for the cache functionality.
    set :cache_enabled, true
    # sets the default extension for cached files
    set :cache_page_extension, '.html'
    # sets the Cache output dir to the root of the /public directory.
    set :cache_output_dir, '' # was :cache_dir
    
    <snip....>
</code></pre>


<hr>


h3. USAGE


Basic Page Caching into static HTML files

<pre><code>
  get '/contact' do
    # NB!  options is currently not working
    cache( erb( :contact ), :options => 'should go here' )
  end
</code></pre>

Expiring old pages (ie: after POST or PUT events) 

<pre><code>
  # not very good example
  post '/contact' do
    cache_expire( '/contact', options )
  end
</code></pre>

See the "test":test/ and "test/fixtures":test/fixtures/ directories for more examples.


<hr>


h3. DEFAULT OPTIONS

* <tt>:cache_enabled</tt> => toggle for the cache functionality. Default is: <tt>true</tt>
* <tt>:cache_page_extension</tt> => sets the default extension for cached files. Default is: <tt>.html</tt>
* <tt>:cache_output_dir</tt> => sets cache directory where cached files are stored. Default is: ''(empty) == root of /public.<br>
    set to empty, since the ideal 'system/cache/' does not currently work with Passenger & mod_rewrite :(
* <tt>:cache_logging</tt> => toggle for logging the cache calls. Default is: <tt>true</tt>
* <tt>:cache_logging_level</tt> => sets the level of the cache logger. Default is: <tt>:info</tt>.<br>
    Options:(unused atm) [:info, :warn, :debug]


<hr>

h3. Credits

A big *Thank You!* goes to "*rtomayko*":http://github.com/rtomayko/, "*blakemizerany*":http://github.com/blakemizerany/ and others working on the Sinatra framework.

Inspired by code from "Rails":http://rubyonrails.com/ &amp; "Merb":http://merbivore.com/
and "sinatra-mailer":http://github.com/foca/sinatra-mailer/tree/master

